i was just saying that it is a unique story and i've talked to a number of people obviously i'm not i'm interested not just in the collection and the collections but the building of the collection the motivation i started a number of people who have given me insights
And to Dr. Ransom, the word that recurs over and over is the vision of.
But let's, you know, most of the people I talked to kind of came after the golden, the heady days.
And those were exciting times.
You were here for pretty much the whole ride, I guess.
Yes.
Now, let me say at the outset that this is a good-spirited book.
I mean, I have sensed a degree of anxiety among people, and I don't, you know, I don't know what... Texas has had a lot of cheap shots thrown at it, let's face it.
Particularly from the British press and the critics.
You know, they've been whacked.
I saw the BBC tape yesterday, and they whacked Texas for having, you know, some locks of hair, you know, or...
It's one of our great items.
That's been here for years and years.
Yeah, so-and-so's socks.
Well, listen.
It was here long before I came.
Yeah, well, so what?
I mean, the Massachusetts historical, the Boston Athenaeum has a book bound in human skin, you know?
I mean, you can go all over.
Mark and Gary, no doubt.
You know, I mean, it's kind of, if you cast a wide net, you know, you're going to bring in a lot of other things.
Oh, we had more fun with that collection of oxen hair than anything else.
Great item.
You were here from the very beginning, and I guess it certainly can be said that Dr. Ansem's policies were unconventional, perhaps controversial.
Yeah, he had a great talent in getting money out of the Board of Regents.
Do you have any idea how he was able to do that?
Well, he was a good con man.
I think he was a man with that kind of personality.
I mean, he could make people believe that anything was possible, even whether it was or not.
I think John Silver had a quotation about him, which is a book written by a man named Ronnie Duggan called Iron Bay Universities, which John Silver said.
Ransom's most exciting characteristic was that he couldn't tell the difference between what was possible and not possible, which allowed people a lot of scope.
I forgot exactly what that quotation is.
But it was very interesting, in a very interesting way that that was the truth, and he did this way.
So that was his great genius in getting money.
And he let us buy things in huge amounts.
Did he have a scheme of what he wanted to get, or did he just want to get as much as he could?
Maybe assess its value.
I don't know that he actually set a policy we created in the beginning, rather deliberately, the notion that
create a truly great library, we would have to collect on a certain materials, because, as I say in the speech of mine, you'll get it.
As I say, you may want to ask questions after you read it.
Nobody else was doing it, and they were very, very expensive.
It would not, I don't think there's enough money in the world, for example, to build a collection of the Cannabula, equal to, say, even Yale Harbor.
But there was enough money to build a better 20th century place.
You know, I think, in effect, we've got intellectual history over the first half of the 20th century, and nobody can prove anything, I think, without it.
I have some exhibition calendar, I showed you in May, and nobody invited, really discussed with you the activities that we carried on so many years, which are really kind of at a load now, because
Well, they don't really do the same kind of thing, so.
And, of course, they're having that position of consolidating and doing other good things, so that's beyond the quite fair thing to say.
I just wanted to do a test here and make sure you're right.
Okay.
I'm sorry to interrupt.
Of course, a lot of the interest, the first notice I could find
in the New York Times about Harry Ransom.
The first entry they had on him in their file, in their index file, is in 1973.
So actually, for 15 years, the first profile they did on him was on January 1st, 1973.
And the occasion for that was the acquisition of the Maximilian Letters.
But in the body of that story, they say that Dr. Ransom has angered other institutions
in the United States and abroad for his occasionally controversial methods of acquisition, the way he finds out about things.
Maybe it was sour grapes that they were leading other institutions to the punch.
Did you have a feel for his methods?
You hear the name Lou Feldman thrown around a lot, and White, a lot of other dealers, I guess, who weren't
On the end with Texas, kind of were disturbed that maybe one dealer was getting pretty much most of the action now.
You know that all book dealers are very jealous of each other.
Indeed.
Don't you?
Of course they are.
They don't exactly hate each other, but they... They're jealous of each other.
Frequently, when I went to New York, and I went to New York quite quickly to make contact with dealers,
to see materials and talk with them about things.
Sometimes, if you think about what I know, you go and see the other one.
There were about three people in New York that we dealt with primarily, I guess.
One of them was we dealt with and one of them was Margie Cohen at the House of Books.
I don't know if you remember her or not.
I don't know.
She was a fabulous lady.
Her husband was
She's gone, isn't she?
Oh, yeah, she died.
She was a bus hitter in front of its hotel, London.
She only went to London each and once each year and stayed at the Ritz Hotel.
And I don't know how old she was, but she was really bad.
Because when you went to her shop, she would always sit out for sandwiches.
She would sit there and eat sandwiches for lunch and talk about books.
She loved collectors.
Oh, yeah, she loved it.
But she... Let me see where I've got that picture.
I'll show you something.
I'll set this up.
This is a gorgeous study, by the way.
Are you doing any writing now?
Well, yeah.
I'm a advisor, but we are looking for it.
And I want to do a book of memoirs.
Carlton Lake has a book of memoirs coming out.
Yeah, I know it.
I know it.
I'm looking forward to it.
Let me just get out of here right here.
This is...
at the location of the opening of the Undergraduate Library, which is not the HRC building, but another one is directly west of the main building, which is Undergraduate Library, right.
This is Franklin Gilliam, the Booker Bookshop, who is now in Charlottesville, Virginia.
What's his name again, sir?
Franklin Gilliam.
His bookshop was originally, I think, New Haven, and he bought it, and then he moved ahead to New York for a while, then he came to Austin,
San Francisco, now he's in Charlottesville.
This is Lou Phelps, this is Marty Covey, this is Bertram Rowley, this is the Pantheon, isn't it?
Francis Hayman, Jim Drake, and Jacob Leibniz.
How is the right one, I think?
Yeah, he died not long ago.
These are all dead now except this one, except Franklin Franklin and Charlottesville.
Now, what was the occasion of that photograph?
Now, this was the opening of the Undergraduate Library.
Of course, they were all very eager to come, because they always were all on some of the money taxes, so they accepted the invitation to come to this opening.
And we had a kind of a symposium in which I asked the questions.
When, about, approximately when was it?
Oh, I'm sorry, I can't remember.
That's okay.
What is this interesting?
Well, this is a joke.
Yes, sir.
I'd buy in there.
This is Andreas.
Andreas came down here and studied and worked for a while, and I got this picture off of his application.
Oh, that's great.
He was a graduate assistant or something.
But, of course, he was always working.
He used to be like you said, Mark Cohen wasn't certain to kill him, and he was in his wife in Texas.
He wasn't in here, so I put this in.
I had this in here.
When he photographed it, he sent it to Andrea.
Oh, he's playing a character.
Oh, he was a innocent character, yeah.
I can tell you something about Don wanted to be the Rosenstock of the generation.
He wanted to be.
Yeah.
He practically was, I guess.
Did he know his books?
Yeah.
He's an exceptionally well-read man.
Oh.
His father educated him to be a rabbi, and he was fitted to be a rabbi, so he quit, and joined the Marine Corps.
And he was stationed in Washington, and he got married secretly, which he shouldn't have done, without his permission.
So his regimenter
group was ordered to China, and he couldn't go without confessing he was married because he had to get his insurance with it.
So when they did, then the officer said, I'm going to punish you.
You can't go to China.
But anyway, that's where he got, one place he got started.
He ran a rental library from the Marine Post.
He was stationed in Washington somewhere.
I think they were at Fort McNair or someplace like that.
I don't know.
And afterwards, he went, when he got out of the Marine Corps, he went to Long Island, I think, and dealt mostly in
Detective Fiction, and he built the Elder Queen collection for Frederick Genet.
You know, the two Elder Queen people, Frederick Genet and the Elder Queen.
He built that, and we bought that Elder Queen collection.
That was one of the first things we bought.
Well, that wasn't the first thing.
That wasn't really the first thing that was going on.
And then he, I think he inherited a lot of money from his brother, a brother who died.
And he had another brother who was a millionaire in Denver who was in the cattle fattening business.
But Lou was a man who lived up to an image that he was former himself.
With a cane, a gold-headed cane, a magnificent portly figure.
But I'll say one thing now.
Coleman took a lot of flack, and a lot of people said that he
Oh, you know this guy Hamilton, for example, don't you?
You read that Sperilus book you wrote?
I've heard it described as libelous.
Oh, it is.
If you can't libel the dead, unfortunately.
Yeah, that's right.
Well, anyway, it is, yeah.
Well, he said that Feldman and Ransom made.
Okay.
Made millions of dollars out of Texas.
Well, this is an outright lie.
I don't know where the hell Feldman money came from, but if Amwell didn't come from us, I mean, he
I mean, well, I don't know.
We owed him millions of dollars sometimes for two or three years.
And the majority of this, a lot of it was purchases, and he purchased it at 10 percent, the dealer's commission, auctions.
He came in a million dollars that way.
I mean, he had, he would think, I used to have to go to the bank with him
in New York, and said, how do you do, Mr. Banker?
Yes, we do owe this man a lot of money, you know.
I wouldn't have looked at it repeatedly.
So he was, yes, he was borrowing money, but he had enough money to operate anyway.
And he allowed you to buy books?
Well, yes.
Buy credit, basically.
In effect, yes.
A layaway place.
He was a banker for us.
He was a banker for us, yeah.
I mean, people don't really know this.
I don't know that it should be.
I've heard it before.
Did you pay him interest, though?
That's the only question I have.
No, I didn't pay him interest.
We just paid him a commission.
He finally raised his commission to 15%, but we never paid him any interest at all.
So, whatever money he made, he didn't make it here.
I know the rents didn't make any.
So he was agreeable to making purchases?
Well, he wanted to build a collection.
He was a bookman.
He loved books.
He had a compulsion like Carl Lake for buying books.
And Carl Lake, he just said, man, he's got a compulsion for buying stuff.
He admitted as much yesterday.
Yeah.
I interviewed him yesterday.
I was in Paris with him once for a couple of weeks.
My wife and I were over there, and we went with him up on Montmartre, and...
as we were just leaving, oh, that church is up there, you know.
He said, wait a minute, I've got to go see somebody.
And he, for two or three times there, he'd say, wait a minute, I've got to go see, he'd go and see some widow, somebody, that he was keeping in touch with and developing.
You see, that's really the way that we built our collection, was that I kept in touch with these people by corresponding to going to see them, for sometimes for a period of 10 years.
And they'd get up where they wanted to come here, and they'd let them spy and let them get it, because you can't do it.
just by going with money.
They don't like it.
Scouts, they're kind of like scouts.
Yeah, for example, even the dealers.
Could you give me a couple of examples of this?
This is great, I would say.
Well, I don't mean to interrupt your train of thought.
For example, I went to see Pound and Daughter in Murano.
I took with Vercomoda.
That's your Pound.
Yeah, that's your Pound.
They wouldn't accept it.
They wouldn't accept the U.S.
A lot of people wouldn't accept Palma without me or somebody in the university.
And I was the one, when I used to go to New York maybe a couple times a month, I went to Europe two times a year usually for 20 years.
And a lot of these people,
They don't mind taking the money from the dealers, but they're not going to give their stuff to a dealer and let it disappear somewhere.
They want to know that it's coming someplace.
They want to know where it's going and who's going to take care of it.
As a collection, too.
Yeah, right, as a collection, too.
And they want it to stay together.
A dealer gets it.
99 dealers out of 100.
That was our great selling point.
I mean, I can't tell you how many times, but Edmund London, we got his collection.
We'll keep it all together, what we call the Edmund Bunn Collection, who it is.
We have his books with paper, the library, the correspondence, everything.
And this is the only way they would do that.
And you couldn't sit in an office here in London without personal contact.
And you gave people rooms, which is nice.
Well, that's kind of a sore point of ransom problems rooms to everybody, and we had a lot of .
It's kind of like a little Smithsonian over there in some respects.
I don't find it unpleasant, but after... Well, I would arrange it if I had had to be arranging the building, which I didn't, unfortunately, even though I was the director of it.
I'd have put all those public rooms on the bottom.
But anyway... How would you arrange it differently?
Well, I'd have it so that you could get to the public rooms easily downstairs, like a museum area, and then have a library upstairs.
Oh, there are some rooms upstairs that have a lot of stuff I don't know that people ought to be looking at.
Did you go to the seventh floor?
I didn't go to the seventh floor.
Well, you should.
That's a theater collection.
There's a larger collection of the Hester Bateman Silver in the world sitting up there in some glass cases.
And they didn't take me up there.
Well, you should go back and sneak up there, and that's the theater collection.
They've got a wonderful lot of stuff there.
Now, that's kind of museum stuff.
Yeah, that's right, museum stuff, and it's got to be where people can see it.
Of course, the theatrical stuff we used to research a lot of times, too.
I did see theatrical stuff, but I really didn't see it in the museum pieces.
But that Hester Bateman collection was given to us by some woman of East Texas whose husband, and she lived in San Angelo at the time, San Angelo, West Texas, and she gave us the Bateman silver.
And she decided she wanted the carpet for it, so her husband could buy one of the funniest stories that I've ever seen.
I loved it.
She and her husband came and met there, and they had a carpet burn out of San Antonio to bring up, you know, especially wearing carpets.
And they would pull one down and see if they liked it, and they would go to stuff and take it out and try to bring another one up.
Finally, they got one they liked, and there was a kind of young, not too old boy that was very superintending it, and he said, Mr. whatever his name was, I forgot, and I said, now you can take this anywhere you go, I can owe you because
that you paid for the much money.
So I said, I'm going to give you a check for it.
This man has been president of both of the Texas Cattle Raising Association and Texas Sheets and Goal Raising Association, where a few people would have.
But I think that man was absolutely wonderful.
He was just as thankful as he could be.
God, he could come right out of Dallas, you know.
You just pat that boy on the back.
I don't know, give him a check.
I heard a story, a lot of different things, about a fellow that went in to see Ransom.
I heard this from Kathleen G. I hear.
And the man came out and said, well, what did Ransom say?
He said, I don't know, but I gave him $20,000.
He didn't even remember what he gave.
He didn't even remember what he was giving it for.
He was so impressed by this.
Well, that was sort of a joke.
He was a Ransom engineer.
He would lay things out, one, two, three, four, and when you got out, you'd say, two, three, four, and you couldn't remember what they were.
How do you judge the man and his accomplishments?
Well, I don't know.
I don't think I reached a conclusion.
I think it was the fact that he allowed an atmosphere to predominate in which people could
do almost anything he wanted to do.
He never just knowed anybody, and if they could break up the money and get him to break up the money, it would be all right.
I don't fully grasp that.
You mean you've let people do anything they want?
Well, he's, uh, there was no, as I say, there was no discipline.
I mean, uh, any project would be, it's wonderful, let's do it.
And he kind of expected people to do things on their own.
He didn't want to tell them to do it.
He was the idea man, so to speak, of the—not even— No, he was a man who listened to your ideas and let you go ahead and do them.
Without interference.
Yeah, well, yeah.
Unless you happened to cross some ship load or something like that.
And this kind of, I would imagine, puts you in a rather awkward position, because you were—
You were sort of the exact, I guess.
Sometimes.
Sometimes it did, yeah.
I've got a good name going to give you here.
Oh, great.
I can't tell you how much I appreciate it.
I don't know whether they showed you any of the exhibition cattle over the line jump.
They really didn't, and I... Well, this is typical of them.
Now, that's Cyril Cotton.
We had a girl working for us, a man, a local brother named Mary Herth, and we bought the...
And she said she wanted to do an exhibit for her.
And so we, in our collections, we did an exhibit.
Is that all 100?
Yeah.
Good for you.
That's okay.
Can I close it to each other?
Yeah, I'm going to give that to you.
I've done this out of it.
Isn't that lovely?
Yeah, I mean, very nice.
Oh, that's a wonderful exhibit.
And this is Cyril Connolly's introduction to it.
Wow, there's a review.
He wrote a review afterwards because of some book he found in there.
Who the hell was it?
Maybe Graham Greene or... Anyway, somebody in the depot there wrote some very unfathomable remarks about it.
Yeah, that gives me a check, because you were able to do this in 1971.
Yeah, right.
These people didn't even start acquiring until 57, 58.
Right.
And within 10 years, you're able to mount.
This is 1964.
Oh, look at that.
Look at that.
That's 100.
You're going to look at that.
100 items, yes.
And this is a little narrow day reduction.
You're not going to have to just write it for me.
Oh, sorry.
I'm sorry.
Yeah, I'm sorry about it.
Now, this.
This is really a magnificent exhibition.
We had a very good, let me see who didn't design for this.
I don't think we had a good designer.
He'd already left us then.
I imported a guy I found on.
I found him that time.
He was teaching at a...
Oh, that radical school in England that let the little girls and boys play with each other if they wanted to.
I don't know.
Well, it's Dartmouth.
It was where all the children of all the actors and actresses went.
And it was one of those very advanced liberal things.
Well, Kim was that way, too.
But he was there, and we did a book together.
And by that time, he'd gone to Zurich.
And he was designing it in Zurich, and he was being prayed for a friend of his carnival, and I was in Italy teaching it at the University of Pisa.
And we were trying to get Ransom to give us the money that he promised in 1957.
And anyway, afterward, we got him to come over here, and we kept him here for about 10 or 20 years, and he designed this, he designed this.
I mean, his design is just absolutely beautiful.
Oh, he was the most, I think, most beautiful.
He came close to being a genius.
He could draw, he could write, he could design, topography, layouts and everything.
And this is an Ezra Pound exhibit that we have.
It's symposium with Pound's daughter and a lot of other people.
I don't think I have an extra money to you.
I could do it to you.
But I don't have one.
I don't know whether they have any or not.
But this is one copy.
Why don't I just write it down and see if I can get a copy of it.
It's called The First Hundred.
They often have copies of it out there.
What this is, is a bibliography of our first hundred publications in the Atlantic Research Center.
It was done by Edwin T. Baum.
Who's called it?
The First Hundred Publications of the University of Texas A. Larson, Edwin T. Baum, D-L-W-T-E-N, D-E-E-N, D-E-N, D-E-N, D-E-N, D-E-N, D-E-N, D-E-N.
Yeah, that was an old picture.
It was in 1971, so I could be able to get a copy of that.
Well, if they have them, they should have them.
I don't know who else will have them if they don't, but ask them.
That's a nice kid there, Dave Oliphant.
Dave Oliphant, yeah.
But anyway, this describes all of these first collections.
And in the beginning, obviously, we were very inexperienced, and our first exhibition catalogs were pretty critical.
But here's that first book.
This was the one that, Kevin, I did when I was in B.B.
I had gone to Florence and found some of these farms and stuff in Oriole's old bookshop.
Remember Oriole Ann?
I've not been there, no.
Well, Oriole was the guy that published the Lugarno series, which was an Apocalypse.
Oh, yeah.
The translations appeared, and also he, I think he saw Lady Charities in the crowd.
He was the private publisher of Lady Travel, he's lover, I believe.
Yeah, well, a large publisher privately, himself, but he doesn't have .
The Montgomery Board spying a paper label on the spine.
Yeah, that's right.
I have a very unusual copy of that book.
Yeah, you do.
Yeah.
Well, it's unusual in that it has all the points of the first edition.
It's a little smaller.
It's not signed.
And I think it was one of the 200 copies that he may have done for review purposes.
I found it for 20 bucks in the store.
Does it have a paper cover?
No, it's like mulberry boards with a paper label on its spine.
You think so?
The quality of the paper is quite extreme.
Well, even then, it's a nice item, even if it is a forgery.
Well, let me see what I can do.
But it is, I've seen it.
A man named Gertzman has just concluded a bibliography of Lady Chattery's honor in which he's described every forgery.
I can't find a darn thing.
And it's here someplace.
Here's my bibliography, if you want.
Okay.
I'll say about it in there.
This is Cambridge, 50-year-old.
Well, I don't know.
It's a bibliography.
I'm doing a lot of my archival research at Widener.
Fortunately, they have just about everything.
I don't know why I can't find things and put up here.
Oh, not to worry.
I'm sure they've been at Harvard and I'll check it out.
Oh, period.
Is this where this goes?
Here it is.
Yeah, here it is.
He just finished it the other day.
He sent me a copy of it.
A lot of pleasure out of your books, I would say.
Well, I'm cutting them down.
I'm going into Texas stuff.
That's what I really keep.
And World War II and these other things.
Most of this large stuff I'll get rid of.
I'll give it to somebody who wants it.
This is a beautiful working study, and I have to take note of it.
Yeah, it is.
It is.
I've kind of made it.
You've got a wine can.
Four maps.
You have one map that shows Texas being part of Colorado.
Right.
And another one that shows when the Republic of Texas was recognized by Great Britain.
Really?
Oh, that's nice.
And then I love that one with California as the island.
That's a famous map.
Yeah, it's nice.
And the history of mapping.
Andreas gave me that.
Really?
Yeah.
Is this Warren Roberts as a naval officer?
Yes.
I was a naval officer myself.
Were you?
Yes, sir.
1968.
I suspect that's what it was later.
68 to 71, USS Ariskany, CVA-34.
Ariskany, what is that, a carrier?
A carrier, now retired.
Was it a small carrier?
It was an Essex class, an exact carrier.
Were you the pilot?
No, I was the public affairs officer, right?
Ah, yeah, right.
Then they won the argument, so I went back to the service.
So what are we on here?
This looks like a pretty good-sized ship.
That's the commissioning of the ship.
Looks like a cruiser, maybe.
No, no, it's a DE.
It had 11 officers and 200 men on it.
Here it is.
That's the real Navy.
That's the Black Shoe Navy.
Oh, God.
It was a what Navy then?
This is the ship.
Douglas L. Howard.
Taken from the U.S.
Mission Bay, which is one of the small carriers.
No, it was a diesel.
It looks like two stacks.
Well, it's just a pony stack.
They had those pony stacks.
I don't know why.
No, you didn't.
Yeah, just one, actually, I think.
It just had one stack, and it was phony.
I don't think there's another one.
Yeah, one day, we did general quarters every morning.
I don't know whether you still did that sort of thing.
Not every day, thank God.
Every morning, we had a day regular general quarters, and they had to test all the firing circuits.
We had to do that?
The guy forgot to take the, there's a torpedo mount here, right here.
He forgot to take the primer, or whatever it was.
And when he tested it,
It shot it off and buried it about three seasons.
God bless us.
The only issue of air tarpeze is that.
But of course it wasn't armed.
It had to go through the water.
I'm sure there were a lot of reports that had to be.
I'll tell you that the people jumped off of that.
Boy, it was like, man, I'll tell you for sure.
And where is this?
Well, that's my son.
He's a chairman of the Department of Microbiology at Cornell.
Really?
That's right.
All the English teacher's children become scientists.
That's nice.
Anyway, this is what I was showing.
While I've got the machine, why don't you just tell me briefly what this collection of books is over here.
Oh, those are the little Oxford Press blue books.
And I buy the ones that were printed before the modern ones.
They're not printed right now.
These are earlier ones.
But you like them as a collection-wide one?
Yeah, right.
I have control them first.
I read all of them once every four or five years.
But anyway, this is the Jonathan Cape Traveler Library, which goes all there down to here.
I don't really have all of them yet.
I used to buy them when I go to England.
And this is a similar series used by it.
Okay, so let's go back to, let's go back to this first.
You always have something to read.
Let's have this go back to this first hundred we were talking about.
Oh, yeah.
Anyway, see if you can get this.
Beautiful.
I'll try.
Oh, he just did the most beautiful job of it and designed it.
He designed this when he was already done.
Put this piece of paper over here, Dr. Rose.
Oh, that's my name.
Okay.
I'm Nick.
This is the doctor.
Is that a wood engraving that was pulled on this?
No.
No, it's not.
No, this is an illustration for something that we picked up somewhere else.
Frank Dolby used it.
Do you know who Frank Dolby was?
Oh, I saw his collection.
Huh?
The greatest Western writer who ever lived, I would say.
Marvelous.
He used that.
I don't know where that came from, but we used it anyway, frequently.
for anything having to do with Texas and Brooks.
That was the first one.
Yeah, that was the first one.
And then the first exhibition we had, that I engineered myself, was this one, Hanley Library.
Oh, you have to talk to me.
Is there a catalog available there, I wonder?
Prefaced by H.H.
Ransom, compiled by Warren Roberts, 500 copies with limitation notice numbers.
That would be a pretty rare book.
Yeah.
Turn it off for a second.
Okay.
I wouldn't say that.
But I've got a copy of it.
My writing was his corrections, because he didn't like some of the things I said.
Anyway, that was the first one.
And it was very...
Listen, it was the first one, though.
And, of course, that Hanley, that T.E.
Hanley Library was, you know, that was something.
November 17th, 19th.
You've got to tell me a little bit about that.
I used to go out to see Frida when she went along to New Mexico.
And she said, well, they don't.
I've been selling manuscripts for a long time to one collector.
He said, well, that's nice.
Who is that?
Well, I'll have to.
We'll have to have to find out if it's hard to tell you.
So finally, they wrote the paper.
He put a letter in and he said, here he is.
Wow.
You can write to him.
He said, you can write to him.
So I wrote to him.
So he told me what manuscripts he had and what letters and stuff that I used when I was finishing the bibliography in Italy.
Well, then.
What is your reaction to this, being a Lawrence scholar?
Oh, well, it was wonderful.
And he had a lot of large stuff.
I mean, this would be a swarant out of it, for example, in case one, down to here.
It's rather nicely produced, that cattle, right?
Well, it was all—they're all—they were designed at home, homemade, home-designed.
The paper looks kind of nice.
Well, it is.
The Praying Division did pretty well.
This is a Texas report by Whitman, in western Texas.
But anyway—
Case five, case three, these are the cases of the book.
Yeah, the cases of the book.
Now, this is all Lawrence.
He had things like a beautiful early Lawrence manuscript with a story, a Russian officer, which is original.
Early manuscript version of the rainbow, final manuscript version of the rainbow.
I mean, God, the things he had are incredible.
Now, this guy was a brick manufacturer, and Bradford comes away.
You know that.
I know that.
Had an interesting wife, too.
She's still alive, I understand.
She is.
I told you that she's really a character.
Well, why did you think she was going to scratch the deal or something, or what?
I said I had a correspondence with him for a long time.
With Henley.
Yeah, with Henley.
And when I was in Italy,
I told Ransom about it, and he got in touch with Jim Drake, and Jim Drake made the approach.
Jim Drake was a member of the James Drake, the firm in New York.
They were the carriage you built, Drake.
Where did Eric Schwartz come into this?
Jake Schwartz was the man who... Who sold the Hanley, I guess.
Who sold the Hanley, right.
I was going to tell you, if you know who Jake Schwartz is, he was the man at... The dentist.
John Hayward called it.
The plot thickens.
John Hayward called it in the docu... What do you call it?
The docu... Now he tried to get... Well, I don't want to break up the... His copy of his book, you know?
I got him to describe it for me.
Whose copy of whose book?
Dick Schwartz's book.
What's the title of his book?
1100 Obscure Parts.
1100... Is it published by a trade publisher?
No, he did.
It was Ulysses Bookshop.
Okay.
1100 obscure points.
I think it was referred to by other books as 1100 obscene points.
Uh-huh.
By Dr. Jacob Schwartz, S-C-H-W-A-R-T-Z, published by the Ulysses Bookshop, 2020.
That's his bookshop, I think.
Uh-huh.
Well, anyway, he was the one that built Hannah's collection, and Schwartz was very shrewd.
And, of course, rather merciless in getting these things out of people.
But Hanley got in a fix.
He lived in an old Victorian wooden house in Bradford, and the insurance people came to see him one time, and he had all these books and manuscripts, and he also had about $3 billion worth of French paintings and new things.
And they said, you're going to have to get rid of either the paintings and the books, or your insurance is not going to work.
I heard that, yeah, they had to keep them up in the garage and stuff, right?
So he sold all the books, yeah.
So it was really a thing with the insurance company?
It's hard to fathom because... Well, it was in a fire trap.
Yeah, but how does a person... That is a consideration of mine.
We bought two.
We bought two questions in.
The first one, this was the first one.
I bought the second one then.
Was it a million dollars?
Several years later.
I've already made it.
Is that about right?
The first one, I don't think the first one was.
The second one may have been.
The price had gone up by then, and it could have been out there.
Well worth it, certainly.
I don't think the first one, though.
Oh, God.
I can't imagine the thing.
I got back from Italy just before the collection of the little ship down here.
So I was here when I got packed.
I hope I'm packing.
And you can't believe the things that came out of it.
Tell me some of the things you felt coming from the collection of stuff.
Well, let me see if I can remember.
Oh, wait.
I just put them over here, so you don't have to get a handy library.
Let me see that.
He didn't just have modern stuff.
He had all that, of course, modern stuff, excitedness.
And George Bernard Shaw, you know, he had about 4,000 or 5,000 letters.
But some of the other things were really incredible.
How long had he been collecting?
I don't know.
Did he love the stuff?
What was your impression?
He was really an unlettered person.
But he was very canny.
He had that instinct to buy what was good.
Did you say lettered or unletered?
Unletered.
He had things like this.
Oliver Carmel's proclamation, making himself chief magistrate of the country.
In the Francis Bacon's advance from learning the first edition, his copy is one of four large paper copies known.
I picked that thing out of that.
when we were unpacking it.
I mean, I don't think anybody even knew that he had the others.
The title is Advancement of Learning, that's the full title, the first edition, 1605.
This copy is one of four large paper copies known.
It is in a magnificent state of the original.
And look here, Isaac Newton, William Godwin, Thomas Hobbes of Isaac, Wealth of Nations, William Harvey's Circulation of Blood, Arden's Peace of the Charter.
William Harvey's anatomical.
John Hayden has his autographed signature on the flywheel.
Yeah.
On the Darwin.
And John Locke's essay on human understanding.
I mean, it's just William Braxton's commentary.
But look, as well as having, we're not just talking about a title.
We're also saying this particular copy, we're talking about John Locke's essay on humane understanding, is the first issue as well, is the first issue as well, having the undated dedication to the Earl of Pembroke born in the 16th century.
So we're not just talking about a rare book.
We're talking about an association.
That was one of the most exciting things that ever could happen, unpacking it.
You didn't know the stuff was in there?
No, we didn't know what was in there all over together.
Who could?
Jim Drake took a quick look at it and said, sorry to pay how much money for it.
I think it was $200,000 or $300,000 maybe.
This is the first one?
Yeah, well below a million anyway.
My God.
You know, what that's worth now?
Yeah, this is yours over here.
What that's worth now?
Well, if somebody from Scandinavia could pay two million dollars just for the holographic manuscript of Metamorphosis.
Yeah.
Well, the thing is, one of the arguments we used to use for this money, actually, when all was said and done, we didn't spend very much money for all this, you know.
What, ten million, fifteen million dollars?
Whatever.
You know how much money they spend over there for scientific research without even thinking about it?
Ten million, twenty million.
As you say this, you're pointing towards the campus now, right?
Yeah, right.
I mean, and they'll spend five million dollars for something which is obsolete before they can get it operated.
And everything we bought increased in value.
And is unique.
Yeah.
And I have to say, over two days that we've spent in that facility,
I am so impressed at the care.
Yeah, it was very nice.
I mean, it's state-of-the-art.
It's wonderful.
Yeah, we worked pretty hard on that.
It's very impressive.
After I retired, they put that conservation.
It always happened, you know.
The new people can demand what they want when they come in, but the old person is there and can't get money to, you know, enough money to keep the doors guarded.
both of these people that have come in after me have been able to get a lot going.
So now they're really on firm establishments.
Well, I've spent, I've had two sessions with Tom Staley and he's quite an impressive guy.
He's very good.
He is excellent.
I'm very glad they got him.
He seems right.
He's right, quite right.
Deckard Turner maybe wasn't right.
No, I'm afraid not.
No, Tom Staley is, I think he's got everything.
He's a book collector himself.
He showed me his experience.
He's a James Joyce person.
I think it's well to have somebody whose main focus of researchers in the 20th century there, because there's too much 20th century stuff, and people who are interested in older periods of life have been undervalued 20th century materials, and he won't.
So that's a plus.
And he'll do a good job.
You can't speak for him, and I asked him, and he said, I'll do what I have to do.
Is it hard to follow Harry Ransom here, or does Harry Ransom cast a large shadow in the eyes of Texas?
I'm not talking about the national or the international community, but is it hard to work, you know, where the man approaches icon stature, you know, whether justifiably or not?
I wonder.
What did he say to that?
He really didn't.
Well, he didn't really follow Harry Ransom.
He followed the secretary.
I understand, but that's right.
I'm afraid the shadow was gone.
Yeah, but Ransom still cast the shadow.
I don't think it's Turner's shadow.
Well, Ransom's a very complicated person.
There are some books.
Read about them.
Well, the great libraries, the Hobson book, I know.
The Awkward Embrace up there.
The Awkward Embrace.
There's a study that created arts in the institution of America.
An inquiry based on interviews with nine men who have, through the organization, worked in North America.
Oh, really?
What of was Harry Ratzel?
The Awkward Embrace.
Now, this is by Knauss, no less.
But when she came down, she didn't see anybody from Harry Ratzel.
Joan Simpson Burns.
It's titled The Awkward Embrace.
And do you think that was maybe the creative artist in the institution in America?
I don't know how many of us.
No comment, huh?
Here's a book.
Our Invaded University's book on a desert.
So what you're telling me is that if I read this book, you're not telling me this book, but you're... I'm telling you if you read that book, it's on your own, on your own.
I'm not going to get... This is 75, too, a fairly recent book, isn't it?
Yeah.
And this is a book... Our Invaded University.
Which is
The development of theses that the industrial military complex has invaded our universities and taken over education.
I think it's one-sided.
But there's quite a bit about Branson in there, and I have no comment about that either.
You're on your own.
You read that.
No comment positively or negatively, or just... No comment.
Don't say that.
In fact, I won't even mention that you mentioned the books.
How's that?
Can I just write it down?
Let me just shut this up.
All right, again, Dr. Roberts, we're talking about you could build a collection, not like the one.
Many times, people have said over the past 20 years, well, you can't build another collection.
The books are all gone.
And I even said myself, with all the money in the world, you couldn't build a collection of people, Widener or Heineke.
But things do keep coming up, and if you've got money and you're willing to spend it, you could put together a marvelous library.
I wish somebody would give me a job doing it.
Do you think $100 million has been spent in Texas?
I don't know.
Oh, in Texas?
Here?
Yeah.
Oh, no, nothing.
You mean for our library?
Yeah, from beginning to end.
No.
This is important because I think this puts it in perspective.
If it's as much as $20 million, I'd be very surprised.
Oh, I think it's more than that.
The New York Times in 73 said $45 million.
Oh, they were wrong.
They were wrong.
So that's a problem that you have then, isn't it?
The misperceptions.
There is a myth.
There's a myth, Russ.
Maybe you could talk about that.
Does that kind of tick you off every once in a while?
Let's see.
How much did this Perot stuff cost that he gave us?
Sixteen million.
Sixteen.
But he didn't give you, you know, he loaned it, I found out.
Yeah, oh, yeah, I know.
The papers say he gave it.
That's another myth.
He mortgaged all of our... Yeah, we were reputed to be kept with lots of things.
We spent money from him, too, yeah.
I think we've mortgaged our future with that Perot stuff.
That's a nice collection.
That's sixteen million, isn't it?
Yeah.
We were after them for years, you know.
I had dinner.
Alfred dropped with me.
We'd have dinner.
What happened?
I think we just had a nice dinner.
Alfred wanted to come down here.
He had a nice little smile and jokes about it.
And they gave me a copy of their book.
You know, they kept all the Shelley stuff and all the romantic periods.
They kept it.
Which is really what we wanted, too, in the beginning.
Do they still have that?
Oh, they set it up somewhere in the foundation.
This I don't know.
I don't think so.
I think so.
Yeah.
Well, at the Potsdamer Library.
Where is the Potsdamer Library?
I don't know.
I'm going to find out now.
It's in New York.
No one.
I'll find out.
Don't worry about that, sir.
But why did they sell so much stuff?
Did they need the money, or what?
Well, I don't know.
If they had a library going, and their Gutenberg came down here, too.
Were you involved in that, the Gutenberg?
No, that was after I'd retired.
What did you think of that?
Well... I mean, they certainly didn't support the collection.
Well, my...
My theory has always been that money is only money, and you can't believe the way people spend money for other things.
And so, I've never felt that any kind of money they wanted to spend from any work put in the library, they'd misspent.
Bravo, you know, I feel that way myself.
My wife and I left HRC yesterday, and we're walking.
And I said, you know, I don't care what anybody says.
This place is extraordinary.
And it's here, and it's loved.
It's not just here.
Everything is so delicately and lovingly cared for.
Because I've been to all the great libraries in the United States, except the Huntington.
That's next.
I'm going there in May of June.
And that, I think, Huntington did in the early part of this century, which you guys did here.
Yeah, right.
Yes, right.
He did exactly the same thing.
He bought it, and he could buy it.
On block.
Yeah, you couldn't.
Even when you get it, he couldn't buy it.
He bought it, yeah.
And he did it, and he didn't waste time.
Right.
And he really preferred buying on block.
Let's take the whole thing.
Give me a price for the whole lot, and we'll take it.
Now, he actually is a role model, I suppose, for this one.
That's my guess.
That's my feel.
He could be, yeah.
And that's one of the themes in my book, We Are Tracing Continuum.
It is a continuum.
Well, think how much money.
You've seen this campus, haven't you?
It's wonderful, yeah.
Well, you haven't seen the medical research place in Houston, Indiana, it's an hospital.
We've got one in San Antonio.
You can't imagine how much money, how many millions of dollars have gone in building scientific research and other things.
And what has gone into the humanities?
Practically nothing.
By comparison.
By comparison, nothing.
If everything that we spent from the time we first started until the time I retired, I don't think it would reach near to $20 million.
That's conservative.
So the Times was wrong, in other words.
Flat wrong.
Oh, the Times was completely wrong.
That was 1971?
January 1st, 1973.
I'll send you a copy of that if you'd like.
That's wrong.
The occasion for that piece was the purchase of the Maximilian papers.
Which the Times said was shrouded in mystery.
How did Dr. Ransom find out about those letters?
Well, Lou Feldman had them trying to sell them for years.
I got that file yesterday.
It's Lou Feldman who had them.
That's exactly right.
I used to go up and look at them.
But why did nobody else know about them?
Feldman wanted to become here.
Feldman was building, helped build this collection.
Feldman wanted to be known as the man who
was behind the man.
Really?
And you think he was sincere about that?
Oh, absolutely.
You don't think it was the possibility of riches?
No.
He was already richer than he needed to be.
God, he had money.
I think you've got it.
I think that's it.
Oh, I can tell you that.
He would have been the modern Rosenbach.
Rosenbach who built Folger and Morgan and the others.
Exactly.
I know.
I know how much money we spent.
I had the spending out of it.
I know the records.
I know how much money went to Lou Thelma.
How much?
I don't know, but there is absolutely no way that he could have made the kind of money that he owned out of us.
He was selling to other people all the time, too.
It's true.
But I think at least 85 percent of the stuff that we got from him came with him acting as a broker.
Auction R. I found it and said, Lou, we want this.
How'd you find things?
Well, I found things all kinds of ways.
I got a letter once in this, for example.
This is most of my memoirs, too.
I got a letter from a man at Louisiana State University.
I believe it's Louisiana.
He said, would you be interested in college?
I'm like,
Maybe.
And I wrote back at you.
Well, maybe I would.
I didn't get any answers.
I called.
He wasn't there.
He was going to Europe.
Nobody knew where he was.
Lou Feldman was in London.
I called him.
I said, Lou, somewhere in London there is a Coleridge collection for sale.
He'd think you could find it.
He called me four days later and he said, I bought it.
Jesus.
It was...
Not very much of Simon Taylor, but it had every other Coleridge you ever lived, Hartley Coleridge the whole one.
How did he find it?
Huh?
I got it.
I don't know.
He was just... So he had a network.
Well, not a network, but he just wasn't.
He probably lined up to Coleridge Ayers.
It was one of the Coleridge Ayers that had it.
Name Coleridge.
He bought it.
He said, I bought it, and if you don't want it, he said, I'll keep it myself.
You know, Rosenbach used to say that to his clients, too, you know.
Whatever his percentage was, he was charging that.
I think he finally went up to 50%, because before he died, he went up to 10% most of the time.
But that's the way he did.
And, God, that was a marvelous thing.
I mean, that's— What did it come in called what?
What was the arch—did it come in as an archive with a name on it, or— Yeah, we just called it the College Project, I'm sure.
We referred to it as that.
I don't know what they call it now.
That's a great story.
So the Maximillian Letters you knew had been around for a while?
Oh, yeah.
I used to say about the news.
He had a shot.
It went for $125,000, which is not a lot of money, I guess.
But so why did it take so long to get it?
Well, we owed him money first.
We didn't want to owe him any more money right there.
Did he buy stuff for you and say, okay, you're going to have to pay this year, you can pay next year, out of next year's budget of the year after?
Yeah, well, he usually would have a list of collections, and he'd send them down, and I'd go look at them.
And we'd consider a ton of money coming in, and I'd go and grab some, and tell him, well, we should get those or we shouldn't.
And then, he'd probably get it, and he would eventually end up getting most of the stuff, and he wouldn't have anything to do with what we wanted to do.
No, there was things up there for a while.
Was it the Hanley collection that really got you on your way?
Yeah, that was the first one.
That was really the first one.
You really entered the big leagues with that one.
Oh, that was just out of the world, yeah.
And he had a second collection a few years later.
Now, is that a stroke of luck that you guys get into that?
You just heard about that?
I did Frieda Lawrence, she told me.
that she was selling manuscripts.
Now, if somebody from Houghton had heard about it, maybe they would have, if they had, it was a question of being the first one there.
Maybe so.
He was completely unknown, as far as I know.
But, I mean, it was a question of being the first one there.
Well, it's a collection of being there, a question of being there at the right time.
The first thing I'd find out is it was.
Nobody knew he existed.
And I had this long correspondence with him.
I ran up a postcard line right here the other day.
He was telling me that he had some more letters applied to Pinker.
Did he love his stuff, Henley?
Did he know his stuff?
Or was he just an obsessive collector?
I heard there were paintings all over the house, hanging in the bathroom.
Oh, yes.
Oh, you can't imagine the paintings he had.
He was an accumulator.
Oh, yes.
I don't know whether there's, I don't suppose there's any pictures of that house or anything, but the walls are completely covered with Renoir, Matisse, Picasso.
A lot of money in bricks, huh?
Monet, Monet, Gauguin, you name it, they're there.
I mean, I mean.
I would say there's a lot of money in the brick business, I guess.
And he was, he was happy to sell those books to us for that price because this proved to the rest of his family that he had to throw money away buying that stuff over his years instead of getting a brick.
Yes.
Did he say that?
No, somebody told me that.
I guess it was Jim Rake.
Was he a nice guy?
Jim Rake, maybe.
He's a strange man.
He had this unusual wife, to be sure.
He wrote a book, a memoir.
The Art of Love and the Love of Art, or something like that.
The Art of Love and the Love of Art.
And I'm told her motto was, I aspire to inspire before I expire.
That's exactly what she said, yeah.
That's the strange bird.
She's still around, I'm told, you know.
How am I doing?
Do you like the sound of my book in any case?
Oh, yeah.
The first, really, it's going to be a good book.
I'm not going to, you know, I want to tell the story.
Let's put it that way.
What you got there?
The strange triangle.
Oh, sad.
Can I just put that up?
Yeah, I went up.
Oh, I went up to that.
Was he a gregarious kind of a guy, Feldman?
Was he a quintessential New Yorker?
I don't know.
He was a one-type man.
He couldn't talk about anything.
Really?
Anybody didn't collect for himself, did he?
Oh, jeez.
Oh, God bless America.
Love of Art and Art of Love, Tula, T-U-L-L-A-H, Hanley's Autobiography, a frank self-exposé, Bearing Her Body and Soul, heavily illustrated, hardcover, CCA, 500 pages, about $11 at your bookstores.
in September 1975.
I just want to finish it.
Our order from Piper, P-I-P-E-R Publishers, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 55403.
The Cinderella...